# E-Waste Management System(EWM)-A Platform for Users, Service centres and Recyclers

*Rohan Shah, Pranav Bhatt, Vandit Popat, Dishant Bhansali, Prof.Sanjay Vidhani. K.J Somaiya College of Engineering, Vidyavihar, Mumbai, India.*

### ABSTRACT
It has been observed that E-waste in India is accu- mulating in a fashionable exponential curve.E-Waste is currently one of the hazardous by-products of human activity which is increasing in number on a world wide scale due to increased usage of technology and gadgets.Disposal of E-waste is a major problem in countries like India and China with huge population density.In order to provide an efficient system of disposal as well as reuse of the e-waste our motive is to create a platform which will curb not only the improper discarding of these wastes but will also encourage reuse of the products in a feasible way.The Plan of this Project is to try and reduce the production of E- waste by creating an environment comprising of User, Service Centres and Recycling Centres.The Project motivates producers to discard their E-waste through the platform by providing certain incentives which in turn results in efficient reduction as well as Management of E-waste which is generated.
*Index Terms*—E-waste, reduction, platform, Service Centres, Recyclers, Users.

### INTRODUCTION
India generates about 2 million tonnes of E-waste as recorded by the global monitor of E-waste in 2019. As mentioned in [6] ,Although India is the only country in South- Asia where legislation for E-waste is passed,this problem till today is largely handled by informal sectors.To handle this our project aims at creating an ecosystem almost similar to which was implemented in [1] for the users, service centers and recyclers and mainly focuses on reselling the products or recycling the waste rather than E-gadgets reaching the dumping ground. Result of implementing this system will not only recover the precious metals from the E-waste and reduce the hazardous gases being released but would also generate new source of livelihood and income for the youth of the country.Thus the main aim is to create user-friendly E- Waste Management System that is able to bind Producer of E-Waste, Service Centers and Recyclers in a single platform. E-Waste Management Platform is a Web Application which deals with the E-waste produced in common household as well as Industries.Similar to the system explained in [1] this Ap- plication provides a platform for the users to reuse(refurbish) or recycle their E-waste and bridges the schism between the user, service centres and recyclers.Firstly it will provide a medium for users to upload the specifications of the product which they want to discard and the service centres may accept the request and carry on the process of extracting useful components from the discarded product and use them in making refurbished products.The Leftover modules would then be extracted by the Recycling centres so as to obtain useful metals.Hence the discarded electronic is completely utilised
and the E-waste generated is minimal. In addition to this, after the extraction is complete certain credit points will also be transferred into users account.With help of these credit points similar to the ethereum incentives mentioned in [1] the user can buy refurbished products on sale which is displayed on the dashboard uploaded by the retailers or service centres.Users can also buys these refurbished products with the help of payment gateway. In order to ensure complete transparency in the system a complete report is generated which displays detailed information on the extraction, tracking, credit points transferred etc with respect to the discarded E-waste.Thus the system ensures a coordinated platform keeping the users intact as well as reducing production of E-waste.

### LITERATURE SURVEY
The research was undertaken on the basis of an adequate study framework. It also involves the study of the technologies and algorithms analysis used by other systems of management to minimize e-wastes planned or proposed.
* [1]This paper reflects an idea which curbs the accumu- lation of electronic products and components after the end of it’s life cycle.A blockchain tracking network is established in which the products are manufactured by the manufacturer and all the information regarding the prod- uct is connected to the ethereum blockchain.Similarly there are suppliers which act as an intermediate between retailers and manufacturers.All the transactions,transfers etc from suppliers to retailers to customers is added to the blockchain.The customers can also resale the product .As soon as the product is no longer useful it is transferred to the recycling centre .As soon as it is recycled, incentives are transferred to each and every entity involved in the transfer, use etc of the electronic product based on certain rules.If it is not transferred then incentives are not provided to any of the entity involved with product.Hence it ensures proper disposal of e-waste after its life cycle ends .
* [2] The implementation on this idea was done on an android application with a parallel webapp.There are four components of the sytem which is proposed- company,vendor,user and admin.The product is manufac- tured by a certified company on the app and is brought by the user for use .After using it he may contact the vendor who is a local repair person to check whether the product has reusable parts or cannot be used and needs to be discarded.It depends on the user whether he wants to reuse,sell or discard the product.If the efficiency is greater than 80 percent then the product should be reused and is transferred again to company so that it is refurbished.The analysis is done by the vendor as such.The app uses an AI camera which scans the products.The admin ensures smooth communication between the entities of the sys- tem.
• [3] The idea that is being focused is on the dumping of electronics.This paper induces a method of capturing the images of the electronics and analyzing the size occu- pied it.Development of android application takes place wherein images of the E-waste can be uploaded and the application shows how much area E-Waste occupies.This does not come up with how to deal with this E-Waste whether it can be repaired again or if it is to be recycled what is the procedure for recycling those E-Waste.
• [4] This paper is a strategy focused on intelligent con- tracts, built in blockchain technology, to improve the situation of E-waste management in India. The getting into the blockchain network of government departments, customers and stakeholders would contribute to better control and greater accountability.Blockchain would al- low for proper bookkeeping by numerous manufacturers and distributors of EEEs on the market. This helps intel- ligent contracts to explicitly identify collection goals and penalize the relevant party where appropriate. However, if they do not meet a particular objective, there is a downside to recycling centers and recyclers.
• [5] Mainly based on managing the End of Life Cy- cle(EOL) of a product keeping track of various parame- ters like usage,humidity etc of the componenets electronic devices use.Thus a web application is developed which can manage product and it’s component and if a certain component is needed in some other device that also can be tracked via this web service.
• [6] It takes up Stepped Recycling method wherein it tries to find certain stakeholders that are responsible for E- Waste management ( local scrap takers ,local recyclers and medium/high level enterprise) and what would be the approximate capital required to operate them.This paper describes the harmful elements that are generated currently based on the techniques our country uses to dispose E-Waste like Landfill and Incineration.
• [7] Approach that this paper takes is capturing of hotspots.In this paper an idea is proposed wherein it is assumed that the places or regions where electricity is more consumed will tend to have more no of E-Waste in future.Technology used is GIS with the help of which hotspots can be captured and then priper norms can be developed to handle those E-Waste efficiently.But this technique cannot solve the problem just by capturing this hotspots, a ecosystem needs to be create wherein the required stakeholders are need to be brought onto a same platform and interact with each other.
• [8] Next research comes up with rather green ap- proach that needs to be followed once the E-Waste has reached the recycler.This paper comes up with a
possible solutions as to why so much of E-Waste is generated. Then some green methodology is described which should be undertaken like how efficient collection of E-Waste is happening,proper segregation and sorting of E-Waste,dismantling and sorting of the junk components etc.Next defining Green processing, which is a wider manufacturers’ obligation that applies primarily to plant growth, with the expectation that at their end-of-life circumstances it would not be a threat to the environment. This proposes different approaches which can be used in the manufacture of electronic devices.
• [9]The solution that is proposed is that the various stake- holders are determined and brought under the control of government.A fee from user is charged to donate the E- Waste and then this money rather than directly giving it to the other stakeholders like recyclers,third party service providers etc this money is handled by government.Also the main drawback is that the government is charging a fee from the user as well as the incentives are not given directly to stakeholders rather it flows through various government agencies.

### METHODOLOGY AND IMPLEMENTATION

The basic method that we have opted is to carry out the individual flow of the three modules of the system and then club these modules, that is the users, service centres and recycling centres to form an integrated and interactive platform which efficiently manages E-waste.Implementation of features like Registration, Login, Donation of E-waste, Selling of refurbished products, Request and status management. All these separate modules will be generated first and then these sub-systems will be clubbed to form our main system.We have selected Prototyping Process Model for this Applica- tion. Prototype methodology is characterized as a model for software development in which a prototype is created, tested and reworked as appropriate, until an effective prototype is reached. It also builds a foundation for the final framework. Our Application is a simple working system implementing only a few basic features when built and then is deliverable to the customer. Then, thereafter,many successive versions or prototypes can be created and delivered to the customer until the desired prototype is derived. The software prototyping development model functions better in this situation, as the project requirements will differ according to the client’s addi- tional needs. It is an iterative, test and error process between the developer and the customer to reach the best possible outcome in order to identify the problem.

#### A. *System Architectural Design*
The system architecture for this project is Model View Control. The following three pieces consist of a Model View Controller pattern: Model - the lowest pattern standard for the data management. View – Any or half of the information to the customer is presented. Controller - Machine code that tracks the Model and Display interactions. MVC isoles the user-interface layer application logic and promotes problem isolation. Here the controller collects all application requests and then interacts with the model to plan any details that the visualization demands. The view then uses the Controller’s prepared data to deliver the final reply. This kind of architecture was decided to keep the project simple yet efficient. Since it can provide flexibility to the application’s GUI based on the requests received by the user this would be an apt form of system architecture for this project.

#### B. *System Interface Description*
##### a) *User Interfaces:* 
E-waste management system is a convenient web application that can be easily operated by any of its intended users. This web application has a simple and easy to understand UI.
The first page of the web-app is the registration/login page where the user is required to give the correct details about the company or enter valid email and password if already registered.
Once logged in, the user is taken to the home page/dashboard. Here the user can view various options depending upon the type of user.
Individual Users/Organisations who want to donate E-waste can visit the Donate page, this page contains a form where in users have to fill in details about their E-waste. Users can buy refurbished products by visiting the buy products page. Service centers who want to collect E-waste can visit the requests page and accept the E-waste from those who are willing to donate. Later on they can update the status of the E-waste treated and send it to a recycler by visiting the status page. They can also put refurbished products on sale by visiting sell refurbished product page.
Recyclers can collect the E-waste from service centers to extract the remaining valuables from the E-waste by visiting the request page. Later on they can update the status of the E-waste treated by visiting the status page.
##### b) *Hardware Interfaces:* 
Android phones and Monitor to use the web-app at the company side.
##### c) *Software Interfaces:* 
Operating System: We have cho- sen Windows operating system for its best support and user- friendliness.
Browser: Any browser which supports HTML, Bootstrap, JS, Web API and CGI.
Database: For storing user data we have chosen MySQL database.
##### d) *Communications Protocols:*
Since, it is a web based application HTTP or HTTPS protocol is followed.

#### C. *User flow* 
Register/Login as a customer.Upload the product specifica- tions which he wants to discard or refurbish .He can search and select the service centre.Provide his details for pickup of the E-waste. View the list of products which are uploaded by the service centre for sale. Buy products using the credit points allotted to him after his product is recycled or refurbished.He can also use an online payment portal in order to buy the refurbished products. View the detailed report of the product which was recycled/refurbished.

#### D. *Service Centre Flow*
The application provides a separate interface for service centres where they can view the products which have been uploaded by the customers for refurbishing. Notification ser- vice when the customer wants to buy the Refurbished Product. Status updation if the product cannot be Refurbished.This status is reviewed by the recycler.The product is then deported to the recycler. Reports on realtime basis is available to the Service Centers.

#### E. *Recyclers flow*
Review the status of E-waste provided by the Retail/Service Centres. Based on the recycling process recycler provide final report to the users of the useful and valuable products extracted from their donated E-Waste. Recyclers are able to see report of useful/valuable elements recovered from the E-waste after process of recycling it.

#### F. *Overall flow*
The overall flow shows the details of the entire system, various processes involved in proper sequence. It also contains the main database of the system and shows its interaction with other processes. All the entities interact with the data-store using any one of the pro- cesses. No data-store is a black- hole or a miracle. Users interacts with processes which are Check Product, Place Order, Check Order Status, Donate E- waste and Check Status of e-waste donated. Service center interacts with processes which are check Pending Orders, Add products to sell, Accept of Decline E-waste from User and Update status and forward E-waste to Recycler. Recycler interacts with processes which are Accept/Decline E-waste from Service Center and Update status of the E-waste they are processing. There are 11 processes and 3 entities/actors in the entire system.

The front-end of the web application is developed using HTML / Bootstrap CSS framework. CodeIgniter framework following the model-template-views architectural pattern is used as base for the application. Java,PHP is used for back-end development. REST API,Flask is used for Recommendation System. MYSql will be used as the database for storage of application data. Visual Studio IDE / Sublime Text will be used for developing the application.

### RESULTS
EWM in comparison with other webapps which are cur- rently in use will prove to be much more efficient in managing and reducing e-waste as it provides all the features which are absent in other webapps .Hence it is a vital application which might bind the users producing and managing e-waste in future.It will also keep the users intact by providing them incentives in the form of online credit .Moreover there is no such E-waste management webapp which provides all these features under a single platform.

### CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The project includes three modules integrated to form a sin- gle webapp to minimize electronic waste . Literature analysis was originally carried out on the chosen subject in order to examine the current contribution and work in the field. The suggested scheme was finalized according to the requirement on the basis of the literature review.The features missing in other works was also added so as to formulate an app which caters to manage e-waste efficiently as well as flourishes e- commerce in the society.Implementing the application at a massive scale is still a problem because there are no such laws which makes an application mandatory to use in order to manage e-waste. The main aim of future is to create more awareness among the individuals to manage such electronic wastes which are neglected over other kinds of waste .One of the sub aim is also to keep the users intact with the system so that it does not fade out easily.This can be done by providing users with incentives, reports, analysis etc on daily basis.Online Campaigns and petitions are among the future works which might prove beneficial in engaging more public to the platform .

### REFERENCES
[1].Dua, Amit; Dutta, Akash; Zaman, Nishat; Kumar, Neeraj-’Blockchain-based E-waste Management in 5G Smart Communities’,IEEE 2020, Conference on Computer Commu- nications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS) Computer Com- munications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Conference on. :195-200 Jul, 2020, Toronto, ON, Canada.
[2]. Saju, Ajith V; salam, Mahsooma A; A, Midhula; Vattakunnel, Anchal J; Alphonse, Jismi; K R, Rajesh-’Improve reusability of electronic components across various industries by maintaining industry database of compatible H/W and S/W version data’ ,IEEE , International Power and Renewable Energy Conference Power and Renewable Energy Conference (IPRECON), 2020 IEEE International. :1-7 Oct, 2020, Karuna- gappally, India.
[3]. P. Jayarajan S.Thenmozhi R.Maheswar S.Malathy R.Udaiyakumar-’Smart Cloud Enabled E-Waste Management System’,IEEE 2018, 2018 International Conference on Com- puter Communication and Informatics (ICCCI),Coimbatore, Tamilnadu,India.
[4]. Neha Gupta ,Punam Bedi -’E-waste Management Using Blockchain based Smart Contracts’, IEEE 2018, 2018 Inter- national Conference on Advances in Computing, Communi- cations and Informatics (ICACCI),Bangalore, India.
[5].Simone Capecci, Eduardo Cassisi, Giuseppe Granatiero, Cristiano Scavongelli, Simone Orcioni, Massimo Conti - ’Cloud-based system for Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment’, IEEE 2017, 2017 13th Workshop on Intelligent Solutions in Embedded Systems (WISES), Hamburg, Ger- many.
[6]. Nishant Shirodkar , Dr. Ravi Terkar -’Stepped Recy- cling: The Solution for E-waste Management and Sustainable Manufacturing in India’, ICAAMM 2016,Volume 4, Issue 8, 2017, Pages 8911-8917, Mumbai,India.
[7]. Nikhita Mangaonkar, Pooja Sabhani, Sudarshan Sirsat-’ Green Technology for avoiding E-waste with the help of GIS’ , IEEE 2014, IEEE Electrical Insulation Conference (EIC) , 2015, p1-6, 6p.
[8]. Anand Jaiswala, Cherian Samuela, Bharat S. Patela, Manish Kumara - ’Go Green with WEEE: Eco-friendly ap- proach for handling e- waste’, ICICT 2014, Volume 46, 2015, Pages 1317-1324.
[9]. Kejing Zhang, Ping Cang, Jutta Geldermann, Fugen Song -’Research on Innovative Information-Flow Management of E-Waste Recycling Network Based on Cloud Computing’ , IEEE 2010, Chinese Control and Decision Conference Control and Decision Conference (CCDC), 1049-1053 May, 2010, Xuzhou, China.
